Press Escape to close this menu.
UTOPIA
DevMode Edition
Recreated by Bluish-Green Productions
Made with Game Maker 8

 OBJECT OF THE GAME

Earn more points than your opponent by 
improving the living conditions on your island to make the inhabitants as happy as possible.

 CONTROLS

Press F4 to switch between screen modes (Maximize/ Restore Down)
Press the Control key to toggle Developer mode on or off (For instructions on Developer Mode, see below)
Press Backspace when Developer Mode is on to open a text entry field
 Player 1:
Up: W key
Left: A key
Down: S key
Right: D key
Select: Spacebar

 Player 2:
Up: Up arrow
Left: Left arrow key
Down: Down arrow key
Right: Right arrow key
Select: Enter key

 SETTING TERM OF OFFICE AND TURN LENGTH

1. Use Arrow keys to select NUMBER OF ROUNDS (from 1 to 999). 
   This is your term of office. Then press ENTER.

2. Use Arrow keys to select length of each round (from 1 to 999 seconds).
   Then press ENTER.

 THE INTERFACE:

You will see an interface overlay surrounding the game screen. Each player sees the following:
G - Gold
S - Score
P - Population
R - Resources

At the center-top of the screen you will also see the Term of Office and 
Turn length which you specified on the previous screen.

O - Term of Office
T - Turn Length



 STARTING THE GAME:

Use the cursors (Green for Player 1 and Red for Player 2) 
to select things to build from the left side of the screen 
for Player 1 and right side of the screen for Player 2. 
To build something, highlight the item with the Cursor and press the Select key (Spacebar for Player 1, Enter key for Player 2); 
you must have enough Gold to purchase the item. 
Position the Cursor over a plot of land on your island and press the Select key again. 
Everything except for Rebels, Fishing Boats, and PT Boats should then appear in the place you had selected.
Each building has a unique purpose and costs gold to build. 
The amount of Gold you have does not factor into your score, it is meant to be spent. 
Each player starts the game with 100 gold bars.

 ITEMS:

1. FORT (50 gold bars). Protection: Guards surrounding land area against rebels. 

2. FACTORY (40 gold bars). Income/Points: Earns at least 4 gold bars per round. 
                            Pollution from factories decreases population growth at a rate of -2 per factory.
						    Each Factory provides 1000 jobs. Increases repair rate of all buildings.

3. ACRE OF CROPS (3 gold bars). Income/Points: When rained upon, yields added revenue (1 Gold per acre). 
                                     An acre of crops only lasts 3-5 rounds. Each acre feeds 500 people.

4. SCHOOL (35 gold bars). Productivity/Points: Increases productivity of factories by 1. 
                                               Each School provides education to 1000 people.

5. HOSPITAL (75 gold bars). Productivity/Points: Increases population growth at a rate of +3. 
                                                 Increases productivity of factory by 3. 
												 Each Hospital provides health care to 500 people.

6. HOUSING PROJECT (60 gold bars). Points: Each Housing Project provides housing to 500 people.

7. REBEL SOLDIERS (30 gold bars). Aggression: When you "build" a Rebel it will immediately jump to a random empty space on your opponent's island. 
                                              Rebels decrease Happiness by 2 and the amount of Gold earned per turn by 2 each. 
								              A maximum of 5 rebels can appear on an island at a time. 
											  Rebels will automatically spawn on an island where the Happiness is lower than 50 and the game is more than half over. 
											  Rebels are not repaired by factories and will disappear over time if your Happiness is more than 60.

8. PT BOAT (40 gold bars). Protection/Aggression: When you build a PT Boat it will appear in your docks, not in the space you select. 
                                                  It can be used to halt Pirates and sink your opponent's fishing boat.

9. FISHING BOAT (25 gold bars). Income/Points: When you build a Fishing Boat it will appear in your docks, not in the space you select. 
                                               It automatically feeds 500 people and earns 1 Gold bar per round. If moved over a school of fish, 
											   it earns 1 Gold bar for every second remaining over fish.

 CONTROLLING BOATS:

To control a boat, position your cursor over it and press the Select Key (Spacebar for Player 1, Enter key for Player 2). 
You will gain control of the boat, which you move in the same way as your cursor. 
To regain control of the cursor, press the Select Key again.

 COMPUTER CONTROLLED ELEMENTS:

Rain clouds: White in colour, these provide water for crops.
Pirate ships: Black boats which sink any Fishing Boat they come in contact with. 
              They can be stopped with PT Boats but only sunk by Tropical Storms and Hurricanes.
Tropical storms: Black clouds which provide water for crops, but damage everything else. 
                 Only the presence of Factories on your island contributes to repairing a damaged item.
Schools of fish: Groups of green dots in the ocean, for fishing.
Hurricanes: Spinning white storms that deal lots of damage to everything.


 BETWEEN ROUNDS:

At the conclusion of each round, all action freezes for a few seconds. 
You hear a "time's up" signal. 
The current Happiness of your island is added to your score. 
When the game resumes, action picks up where it left off. 
You automatically earn 10 GOLD BARS per round, so long as no Rebels are present on your island. 
Each Rebel decreases this amount by 2.

	SCORE:

The largest score possible each round is 100, which can only be attained if the population of your island is 100% happy. 
"Happiness" is determined by the following factors:
Equal or greater amount of resources to population - 15% of score
1 Housing Project per every 500 people - 15% of score
1 School per every 1000 people - 10% of score
1 Hospital per every 500 people - 25% of score
1 Factory per every 1000 people (for jobs) - 15% of score
No rebels - 10% of score
If population growth rate is positive, you get +10 score. 
If growth rate is negative, you get -10 score. 
Keep an eye on your Population to determine if the growth rate is positive or negative, 
it should change every 2 seconds unless your growth rate is 0.

Developer Mode:
When switched on, Developer Mode gives access to functions otherwise unavailable in Utopia. 
All buildings draw their own healthbars, 
Pirate ships and Fish draw their destinations (although they may not arrive at them) and rain clouds, 
tropical storms and hurricanes all draw their fixed paths (which they will follow). 
In addition to this, you are given a text input tool to alter an of the local variables of the game's controller object. 
Below are a list of all the local variables you can edit and their function. 
Typing in a variable not listed below will result in an invalid entry.

Variable Name  : Description
term_of_office : The number of turns in the game
turn_length    : The length of each turn in the game
devmode        : Turns Devmode on or off (should only be set to "0" off, or "1" on)
rebel_spawn    : The turn number at which rebels begin to spawn
gold1          : The amount of gold player 1 has.
gold2          : The amount of gold player 2 has.
score1         : The amount of points player 1 has.
score2         : The amount of points player 2 has.
population1    : The population player 1 has.
population2    : The population player 2 has.
resources1     : The resources player 1 has.
resources2     : The resources player 2 has.
happiness1     : The happiness player 1 has.
happiness2     : The happiness player 2 has.
productivity1  : The productivity player 1 has. (influences factory gold production per turn)
productivity2  : The productivity player 2 has.
housing1       : The housing player 1 has. (500 for each house)
housing2       : The housing player 2 has.
schools1       : The school availability player 1 has. (1000 for each school)
schools2       : The school availability player 2 has.
jobs1          : The number of jobs player 1 has. (1000 for each factory)
jobs2          : The number of jobs player 2 has.
hospital1      : The hospital availability player 1 has. (500 for each hospital)
hospital2      : The hospital availability player 2 has.
growth_rate1   : The growth rate of player 1's population.
growth_rate2   : The growth rate of player 2's population.
happy_score1   : The component of the "happiness" score determined by player 1's growth rate.
happy_score2   : The component of the "happiness" score determined by player 2's growth rate.

-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-
Original game created by Mattel, (c) 1981, 1997 Intellivision Productions, Inc.
Design, program: Don Daglow
Graphics: Kai Tran, Don Daglow
Sound: Russ Lieblich (sound effects used in the game are from the original)

Special Thanks to Rooster Teeth Productions, Geoff and Burnie for providing the inspiration to make this game.
